subject when Abramowitz was turned down by the
Malaysians the other day they refused him as
ambassador down there this subject came up about
somebody had said that he was and Carter he had been
the instigator of Carter's withdrawal from Korea
and the press was trying to just somebody trying to
deny it but somebody doesn't know what the hell is
going on all they got to go back and read the
testimony before the Senate Armed Services
Committee when General Vesey and I testified for
those troops staying there and Bromwich
testified against it. So, I know what the hell I'm
talking about. Okay. You left Korea in 1976. And
then you had your last assignment. Tell me about
that special assistant to the CSA in which you did
the Hollingsworth Report Central Europe
Assessment. That came about as a result of me
developing a new strategy for the defense of
Northeast Asia and Korea. And it came about as a
result of Senator Sam Nunn's interest in NATO
Central Europe.
and as a result of his visits over there and the
inadequacies that he could see as a senator. So he
asked the Secretary of the Army and the Secretary
of Defense to, uh, I came back to retire and I went to
Sam Houston, Fort Sam Houston. Really? Yes. At
this time you were, you were, you came back to
retire? To retire, yes. Did you want to retire? Oh,
it didn't make any difference to me. I got to where I
couldn't hardly see out of it with one eye anyway.
And I was getting a little tired.
But no, you know, I never have retired. I haven't
retired yet. But you really, you were not, you
weren't interested. I went on television by
satellite for today's show and told them it had
been decided that by my government that I would
retire and that's what I was going to do. What told
you about your retirement? The Chief of Staff of
the Army asked for my retirement. Oh, he asked for
it? Oh, yeah. You know, he didn't have any other
assignment for me after I finished over there. You
see, three and four stars are This is an interview
with General Hill in Abilene and today is the 20th
of August, 1982. Let's start out, sir, by getting a
little bit of background information for the
record. Could you tell us where and when you were
born? Well, I have a little clipping that'll, out
of the 1967 Who's Who. Okay, good. that'll
simplify that for you.
I'll go get that right now and hand it to you and put
it in your file. Oh, great.
Before we go on, I'd like to ask you if you would
donate your information that will be on this tape
to Texas A&M University. Well, what are you going
to do with it? Copy write it? No, we're going to put
it in our archives and we're going to leave it
there. And we're going to give you a copy. Okay.
Good, because we'd like to make sure that it's all
donated to us. Could you tell us a little bit about
your parents? Yes, my father was a staunch pillar
of the Baptist Church in El Dorado, Texas,
Schleicher County. And I think he sold every
windmill in that county.
And tons of barbed wire for fencing in the ranches
that were
going out of stock raising and taking a fling at
farming.
That town is about 48 miles south of San Angelo. On
the old wagon road, it was 52 miles. And it took the
Model T Ford a long time to replace
the wagons.
And
we... Actually the wagons weren't replaced until
they got the hard surface road immediately after
World War I.
I think that stripped from San Angelo down to the
Sonora and later, much later, on down to Del Rio.
That was a high dry country and they didn't know
much about hard surface roads, but they decided to
experiment out there where they had a good caliche
base and dry weather. And I think the first fifty
miles of hard surface road was from San Angelo to El
Dorado And the engineer that bossed the thing and
proposed the idea and got the estate to back it was
the county engineer for Tom Green County, San
Angelo.
So, that was when automobile traffic really came
and truck traffic. Sure. fully displaced the
animal-drawn vehicles. Can you tell me something
about your mother? She was
quite active in the Eastern Star, and she went to
the Baptist church with my father, but oddly
enough never joined the church.
sectarian branch of the Christian church that her
father had belonged to. So that was her one stand on
independence.
Was your family pretty religious then? Not
particularly. Not particularly?
It took rather—yeah, I'll stand on that
statement, not particularly. You said your
father was a staunch Baptist? Baptist. But not
particularly religious? He was staunch and a
leader in the church and donated, I think, more
than a tenth. He tithed. But I don't know how much of
it was good business among his customers and how
much of it was greed for more guilt.
What was the authority in the household?
It was pretty well a joint command. Oh, a joint
command. Yeah.
Very much so. Now you've had a very successful
career not only as a general officer but in the
university world. What credit do you give your
parents for that? Well,
in the first place,
my father was a vast reader. He had no degree. I
think he had what would be considered in his day a
first-class prep school education and a private
school down close to Houston. And that education
was provided pretty much by one of his older
brothers.
He
got a good foundation. He learned to read and read
for fun. And the novel was
having its early impact on American history.
literature and even to the point that some of the
churches were preaching against it as ungodly and
whatnot.
But he went in for reading. He read anything that he
could get his whole hands on. And he had the largest
library, by the way, in El Dorado. He had more books
in his library than they had in the high school. But
that's not a big boast because the high school had
its library largely consisted of an unabridged
dictionary, a fairly recent set of the
encyclopedia, and sundry books that teachers had
taken away from the students because they were
reading the book instead of reading their
lessons.
In other words, there were less than 50 or 60 books
in the high school library, but our house, the
front room, had a wall and bookcases, had a wall of
books. So you always read a lot then? Yeah.
He was an avid reader. And he had an old Chambers
encyclopedia, an English edition. I don't know
where it came from, but if anything came up that he
didn't quite understand, He'd got down that
10-volume encyclopedia, I think it was dated
about 1876. And he'd look up the details and get
himself on the track. He was a remarkable man. He
was born in 1862 in the
middle of the Civil War. He had three brothers in
the Confederate Army. His father was a member of
the legislature of Alabama through the four years
of the war. His father, I think, was elected to the
secession convention that took him out of the
Union. I think he served, that was a convention, I
think. but he was in the legislature either as a
lower house or the upper house. Four years, I think
he was two years in the lower house and two years in
the upper house. My father was born in 62 and had a
very hard life.
His father was a small business man in Jasper,
Alabama. And during Reconstruction in Alabama,
he had to leave, and he left for
New Orleans, for Louisiana, and he was also a lay
preacher. preach for nothing for country
churches that had no pulpit, no regular, that
might not have money enough to hire a permanent
preacher. But as a businessman in Jasper, he would
go out and do that, and I think that's what got him in
politics. And he became head of an orphan's home in
Louisiana, held that job for a while, and he
decided to turn to paid preaching as a way of life.
Well, pretty soon he had to leave Louisiana in the
Reconstruction days, and he and his boys and
family moved to Texas in the Houston area. down
around a little town named Grapeland, down in,
I've never been in it,
down around close to Houston, the city of Houston.
And that's where he got a pretty good education,
was in that, in a private school
down there.
He took a business college course on bookkeeping
and spin Syrian handwriting and bookkeeping. No
typewriters in his day. So
that was from Tyler, Texas. They gave him a diploma
about the size of the wall there. with a lot of
script on him and so forth. And that's the only
thing I ever saw that evidence of education.
But he was an educated man. Can you tell me
something about your education? Well, it's
rather conventional.
One year at A&M,
Tell me a little bit about your primary and
secondary education first before we get to A&M.
Well, the high school,
the high schools in those days were making the
transition from the conventional ten grades
between the first grade and the graduation and
the—they
were making the conventional—
When a guy had been through ten grades in a town of,
let us say, two thousand, he was educated. and he
could then go usually quite often. At that stage
they did go to business colleges or they took
longer
courses. Now the big cities
at that period were experimenting with the
eleventh grade or introducing the eleventh grade
and advancing the of knowledge to more difficult
subjects, such as algebra, to quadratic
equations. When you got to quadratic equations,
which was in the middle of the book, that was
enough. They could pick it up later.
But algebra was unheard of.
until I think they brought in the eleventh grade.
At least I never heard of it. So did you finish the
tenth grade and then start off at A&M? Yeah. A&M had
a— Why'd you decide to go to A&M? Well, they put in
a—the city schools were putting city schools the
size of, well, pounds ten or twelve thousand
working cities in those days, nineteen, ten,
eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen,
sixteen.
The
big cities were already putting
in the twelfth grade But these smaller cities,
like San Angelo, were saying, we want to
experiment with the eleventh grade before we get
into this stuff, because teachers of these
advanced subjects were scarce. Yeah, I would
think so. And incidentally, most of the
mathematics teachers were getting, were being
found in technical schools. Most high schools had
two or three A&M students in it, usually teaching
mathematics and very elementary science.
The teachers' colleges weren't in that business.
They were normal schools. Particularly, it was
reading, writing, arithmetic. And as the tune
went, talked to the tune of a head Chris Tick,
A&M was admitting people with a tenth grade
diploma if he showed enough mental confidence to
make a passing grade on a second class teacher's
certificate. Now in those days they had first
class teacher certificates that you could teach
any subject anywhere in the state. An easier
examination that I think stopped short of algebra
or quadratics.
It was easier subject and so forth. And anybody, it
was pitched to entitle a person to get a job
teaching anything under the grammar school
level. In other words, the ninth grade or eighth
grade, something like that. So you took that
examination? Texas A&M said anybody that
could pass that second grade examination, a
second class
examination, would be admitted on probation.
I took the examination largely because the high
school superintendent said that anybody that
graduated had to show competence to teach past
the—had to show enough—in other words, it was a
comprehensive examination that he used and made
it official by having the certificate issued. It
was his qualifier. So that was, I had the
certificate. And so I was admitted in the middle of
the year. I think I got down there in late February.
February of 1917 or 1916? I think 1970, yeah, 1970.
And then that summer I got a job as a state driver and
chain man on a survey team of the
old railroad out of Fort Worth, Fort Worth and
Denver. I think the Burlington owns it now. on the
old Fort Worth and Denver and
by that time World War II, World War I had erupted
and the National Guard was already on the border or
on the way home and those that were on the way home
were immediately It called active duty. And
everybody was volunteering here and
volunteering there. The entire senior class down
there, I think, volunteered for the Officer
Candidate School at Leon Springs. The enrollment
shrank from about 2,000 to the following year. I
don't think they had more than about the following
Fall, I think they had about, got down to the second
semester, about 1,300.
And
the upperclassmen were all, if a guy was over 21
years of age, he was going to an officer candidate
school. Well, I wasn't old enough to go to an
officer candidate school. So it looked like the
campus, this is at the end of the first semester of
1917, 18.
It looked like the place was going to be deserted.
So I had a friend, to be frank about it, I didn't
forge my father's name to a telegram, but I
managed to get a telegram anti-Britain
on the stationery that the incoming messages were
on. It would pass muster. Well, that telegram gave
me permission to withdraw from college. and
enlist in the Navy. And so that sprung me. I guess
the, I've forgotten the date of my enlistment, but
it was about Christmas time in 1918. Christmas
time in 1917. Christmas time 1917 is right, 1918
coming up. I think that's, now of course in the
Navy, the Navy took the Armistice Day for what it
really was. They said if the Army, if you won the war
on the ground, okay. You've made the Germans
surrender all of their artillery and ammunition
and go back to the armistice line and demobilize
the army. That's the great victory. You've won the
victory. We in the Navy can't build ships fast
enough if these bastards decide to renew the war on
some technicality. We will begin giving
discharges to those who
enlisted after the war began, after the
declaration war. He says we will begin
demobilizing them as soon As we know, the peace
treaty is signed. Well, the peace treaty wasn't
signed until 1990.
Long about the middle of July.
The ship I was on was a destroyer. I was a seaman
signalman. Where were you stationed? I was on the
Destroy Your Hearty, which is a thirty-knot,
four-piper, crew of a hundred and twenty. And we
were, when the war ended, as I remember it, we were
on the Azores patrol or something like that. Did
you see any action? No.
No. A
distant whale with a good spouter could easily be
mistaken for a submarine periscope.
Nobody had shot a gun lately. No, we did a lot of
patrolling. I'll say this for those destroyers,
you learn seamanship often. You just don't, you
either become a seaman or something happens
to you. Well, to make a long story short,
when time came for for Navy discharges, they put on
the bulletin board those people who had enlisted
in the Navy after a certain date and would be
discharged, if they could provide an affidavit
under oath from their parents or former employer
that they were either needed, had the job open farm
back home, or if they were in college, they could be
returned to their pursuit of knowledge.
So I thought I was in that second category.
So I sent my father a letter told him that I could get
out of the Navy if he sent me an affidavit that
I had
been both employed and a student. And I could get
out and go back to college or do something else.
probably something else. I didn't add that, but
that was my mental thinking. And so my father sent
me a telegram collect. The destroyer was being
overhauled and
having her engines tightened up. And the dry dock
at the time He sent me a telegram collect. He says,
you knew how to get my name on a piece of paper when
you wanted in the Navy. I hope you're equally
resourceful now that you want out. Good luck and
best wishes.
So I went into a heddle with the yeoman that was the
ship's rider. What kind of, what was the best thing
to do? He says, well, it's very simple. He says, if
your college, he says, we're getting statements
from deans and registrars of colleges
authenticating the status of Tom, Dick, and
Harry. He said, we've already discharged two or
three men on that. And he says, if you were in
college, get the name of somebody down there that
can read and write and certify where you were and if
you want a book, go back. So at that time, the
registrar at Texas A&M was a man with a fabulous
memory.
the cadets all commented about his memory. And his
name, I can't think of it at the moment, but he
became president
of the A&M College of Kansas. Now, whom would that
be? I don't know.
Which became Kansas State. Yeah, they have an A&M
up there. It's a candid state at that town just
north of Des Moines. University town. And it's in
the same class as
those, well, Lansing, Michigan is the A&M for
Michigan. Now this university over that I'm
talking about is usually called by the name of the
town that it's in. Just like a lot of people refer to
A&M as Bryan or College Station.
And so you wrote to the registrar? I wrote to the
registrar and told him to bail me out. Bail you out?
And he graciously wrote a letter authenticating
the fact that Seaman Signelman, first class J.D.
Hill, was a full-time student in that institution
from so-and-so to so-and-so. And that bailed him
out, you see.
My father never mentioned it again. That
was a closed book.
Well, I guess that's enough about
that. What's the next thing you want to talk about?
Why'd you go to Baylor?
Didn't you come back to A&M? No. So you came back to
Texas, and instead of going back to A&M, you went to
Baylor. Why? Well, that's a legitimate question.
The truth about it is, I didn't want to go anywhere.
You really didn't want to go back? I had learned
navigation,
I say navigation, but the fundamentals of
navigation. I knew I was a good seaman.
I knew that I could pass a third mate's license.
because it tells you exactly, before you take the
examination, exactly what you've got to do. I
figured I could pass the third mate's license, but
to stand for the examination,
I would have to have another year at sea. Well,
that's the thing that I had just turned my back on.
One race I wanted out was I decided to sample the
Merchant Marine and see what it was like to work on a
civilian ship. Frankly, I liked the Navy.
I thought I might like it better if I had more
opportunity. And
I came back and this road building was in its
infancy. I'll mention that later. So I came back
and without any trouble at all,
got a job in San Angelo on a team. that had been
organized by this fellow, I think his name was
Gilchrist. Something like that. The engineer
there. Yeah, Gilchrist. Was that it? I think he was
on the faculty at Texas A&M. Yes, he was. One time or
another. Well, for $150 a month, I would be
instrument man on a... one of his teams. And most of
it was just plain surveying and staking out and
measuring off.
Not a hell of a lot of erudition was required. And so
$150 a month after I think when I was discharged I
was getting $46 and some odd cents a month. $150 a
month at that wage level, prices those days, was a
good job. And so my father was very insistent that I
go to college. And every time a college would open,
My mother would pat my trunk at the lease and say,
no, not this week, not this week. No, I wouldn't go
there, I wouldn't go there. So finally I stood them
off until the end of October, nursing that $150
job.
The last college in the state that was still open
for entering students was Baylor University.
My older brother had gone to Baylor, and I had a
cousin and an uncle and an aunt in Waco.
largely through him, I decided rather to continue
the family argument, I'd go to Baylor. And my
policy of Baylor was to take not the courses that I
needed to know for any general special purpose,
but to get a college diploma and satisfy the family
I was an educated person.
Well, in order to get out of there quick, you had to
make good grains. If you made good grains, they'd
let you take one-fourth more hours than the
regular schedule. I think their rule was if you
didn't fall below you had A's and didn't fall below
a B.
Otherwise you were back with the herd. So
my policy was, then I went back to see you in
merchant ships in the summer.
And
so the,
Hi there. Good Scandinavian
name.
Well, I was in Fort Worth. I'll turn this on. Well,
today is August 21st, Saturday, 1982. This is our
second interview, and last time you told me that
you did not like education. That's the reason why
you went to Baylor, because it was the last school
that started the latest in the year. And you
continued education, though eventually got a
master's degree. and a Ph.D. degree, which is
somewhat rare for someone who doesn't like
education. How do you explain that? Well, there
was another reason for not going to Texas A&M.
I guess two full classes had gone through there
during the approximately two years that I was in
the Navy. And so all of these fellows that I had
known as freshmen were now
sergeants and
cadet officers, those that were sophomores, were
now the majors and the captains of the cadet corps.
And having been in the Navy for two years, I didn't
intend to go back into a place where I would be at
best characterized as a sophomore.
Another thing I had kind of changed my ideas about
engineering as a career. And
the most important thing is I made up my mind I
wasn't going to go there because even though I
could go there as a non-member of the cadet corps,
and to wear civilian clothes. That was the
trade-out with the returnees, many of whom had
been captains and lieutenants in battle over in
Europe. So,
I knew I could go there and live a civilian life, but
you can't live a civilian life on an army post
because they have reveille every day in the
morning. And when reveille blows you have to get up
the same as everybody else. And when the noon meal
is served in Speza Hall, you're there with the